---
title: Maybe? Definitely.
---

Here is a use of Scheme's findf operator.

```
> (findf number? '(1 #f 2 dog))
1
```

Findf takes a predicate and a list, and returns the first element of
the list for which that predicate holds true, returning #f in the case
that the predicate holds for no member of the list.

So if we change 1 to one, then we will now get a different answer.

```
> (findf number? '(one #f 2 dog))
2
```

And if we change 2 to two, we get #f, as now no elements of the list
are numbers.

```
> (findf number? '(one #f two dog))
#f
```

Lets instead ask a different question of this list: boolean?

```
> (findf boolean? '(one #f two dog))
#f
```

Whoa ho ho. What've we got /here/?

findf returns the first element of the list for which that predicate
holds. #f is a boolean, so that's what's returned. Lo, the confusion
that can result.

```
> (findf boolean? '(one two dog))
#f
```

Let's look at the issue a bit more abstractly. The meat of the problem
is that the value we're using to denote
an "error" ("failure", "exception", what have you) is /in/ the set of
things that we could possibly return as /actual/ answers. Some
languages use -1 as an error condition instead. Obviously, that's no
good as an error value here, either.

There's not a safe value we can pick, because for whatever value we
pick, it might be someone wants to hunt for precisely that value in
their list. For instance, we might try to patch the problem above,
saying to ourselves "Well, #f is useful. Comes up all the time. I'll
write my own findf, and pick a different thing." Heck, we'll choose
this-obscure-symbol-means-failure-Qx29t7.

And that works great until some dingbat comes along and does the
following

```
> (my-findf (lambda (y) (eqv? 'this-obscure-symbol-means-failure-Qx29t7 y))
           '(a b c this-obscure-symbol-means-failure-Qx29t7))
this-obscure-symbol-means-failure-Qx29t7
```

But as it turns out, that might not be such a dingbat thing to do,
after all. All the time, we write code that generates code. Someone
who's generating Scheme code might very well have reason to hunt for
that symbol in a list.

Anyhow. What's clear is that the above suggestion is just sort of a
patch. These sorts of things come up all the time. We report #f, -1,
Error 404, etc., etc. It seems like there ought to be a unified
approach to handling this sort of problem, and one in which we don't
have to kludge together some sort of an error code for each distinct
case.

The maybe monad gives us the power to do both of those. It provides a
generic way to handle and propogate failure, and, by virtue of being
general, it means there's no ad-hoc solution to the value that denotes
an error.

We've got return and maybe, those new relatives of eta and * that we
introduced. And we've also got fail, which is our way of signaling a
failure.

```
(define return-maybe
  (lambda (a) `(Just ,a)))
 
(define bind-maybe
  (lambda (ma f)
    (cond
      [(eq? (car ma) 'Just) (f (cadr ma))]
      [(eq? (car ma) 'Nothing) '(Nothing)])))
 
(define fail
  (lambda ()
    '(Nothing)))
```

return is just another name for eta (or unit). More on that in a sec, but a quick
reminder.

There's lots of monads, and they all have the same type signatures for
the return and bind, and they all have to obey those monadic
laws. We're gonna walk though, at a type level, what return and bind
/are/, how those things relate to eta and *, why their essence and
behavior makes sense, and then look at how the actual implementations
of return-maybe and bind-maybe make sense.

Whew. That's a tall order. Well, let's get to it.

As we were. return is just another name for eta.

```
return : alpha -> Malpha
```

The job of return/eta is to take a "pure" value -- that is, a value
from the regular land of computation, and wrap it up in the
monad (burrito) (or like Just above.)

For our maybe monad, there are two classes of things that are monadic values.

1 : (Just <x>), where <x> is any old thing you choose. (Must it be a pure value?)
2 : (Nothing)

This second one is the value provided by invoking fail. Notice that
because all the pure values are wrapped up in a list with Just at the
front, then this (Nothing) doesn't have the same problem as we had
before with -1 or #f.

If I want to return #f out of my findf-maybe (which we'll write in a
second), it'll come out as (Just #f). If I want to signal something's
not in there, it'll come out as (Nothing).  (Of course, that could be #f).

And now, let's consider that same dingbat from before, trying to be
cute again.

```
> (findf-maybe (lambda (v) (equal v `(Nothing))) '(-1 #f (Nothing) 404))
(Just (Nothing))
```

Ah-HA! Lookie there. Unlike before with Scheme's findf, now we can tell
when the failure value is exactly that thing looked up in the list,
vs. when it's actually returned as a failure value. We've got the
problem licked. Well, as soon as we figure out bind, relate it to *,
explain why bind-maybe makes sense as a bind, and use this to
implement findf-maybe.

* was typed as follows.

* : (alpha -> Mbeta) -> (Malpha -> Mbeta)

That is, it takes a function and returns a function. A few months ago
that in and of itself might've been mind-blowing, but it's pretty
old-hat now. BTW, if you need a mundane example, integral is the sort
of thing that takes a function and returns a function.

In the biz, we always associate curried functions to the left. If I
have something that looks like

```
f : int -> (bool -> (string -> (bool -> (string -> int))))
```

those parens start to get a bit annoying there.

So we instead write it as

```
f : int -> bool -> string -> bool -> string -> int
```

but we all know what that means. So you'll more likely see * typed like

* : (alpha -> Mbeta) -> Malpha -> Mbeta

That is, it's gonna be a function that takes an f, then it takes an ma.

```
(define *
  (lambda (f)
    (lambda (ma) ...)))
```

And does ... well, who knows what the /particular/ implementation does
at this point, but it does something like calling the function on that
argument.

A quick digression, seemingly apropos of nothing. Let's define an
operator curried-app.

```
(define curried-app
  (lambda (f)
    (lambda (a)
      (f a))))
```

Nothing terribly fancy here.

BUT--imagine a world in which that's the only way you apply
functions. You don't get to call them directly on their
arguments. Instead, when you wanna apply a function, you pass it to
curried-app, to which you then pass the argument upon which you wanna
call that function.

There's not much use to doing such a thing when we do our regular
run-of-the-mill Scheme programming. But when we're working with
monads, it's a necessity. By the way, did you notice the type of curried-app?

```
curried-app : (alpha -> beta) -> alpha -> beta
```

Remarkably, strikingly, /suspiciously/ similar to the type of *. *
does what curried-app does, except it works over monads. When using
monads, we've given up the necessity of doing our own function
applications to arguments. It's passe. Well, not really that, so much
as we're modeling effects, and we want to make sure the effects happen
the right way. * (well, really it'll be bind) is going to make sure
that happens, 'cause it and it alone is allowed to /do/ the
application of functions to monadic arguments. So if * (bind) is
right, then the whole process is right. We've deputized * (bind) as
the function-apper. And because * (bind) has to obey the Monadic Laws
if it's to be a genuine, bonified, monad. Since we're using
pre-certified monads, we're certain that they're up to snuff, so if we
just use'em correctly * (bind) will make all the applications work
properly.


Alright, I'm done writing bind in parens. Let's describe bind, so that
we can just get to using it. A couple of things.

1. Writing code with nested calls to * starts to get uuuugly.

```
((* (lambda (x)
     ((* (lambda (y)
          ((* (lambda (z) ...))
           arg3)))
      arg2)))
 arg1)
```

The flow of control is going to the right. Programs written this way
end up building these giant rightward dagger shapes.

2. By doing all of our monadic code with calls to a function-apper
mechanism, it makes sense to think of that part of the program as
doing work in units of function-apping. "Do a *, which then demands
another *, which ...". Why bother to curry *? Nothing's gonna happen
until we give it both parts, and it's not really of use to do'em one
at a time.

It'd be nice if my code read linearly, down the page, rather than
having to follow it out in that triangle pattern, and if I treated
these applications of function to argument as the real unit of work.

Bind does both of those.

The type of bind is

```
bind : (Malpha x (alpha -> Mbeta)) -> Mbeta
```

That is, it takes two arguments at once, the argument and the
function, and it takes'em in that order. Notice, now, if we have some
stuff that's nested, then the work that we do next, that's part of the
function body, will be underneath the stuff above. We can read what's
going to happen in order down the page.

```
(define bind-maybe
  (lambda (ma f)
    (cond
      [(eq? (car ma) 'Just) (f (cadr ma))]
      [(eq? (car ma) 'Nothing) '(Nothing)])))
```

So here's our definition of bind-maybe, again. We can see it's doing
at least part of what we wanted it to do. It takes two arguments, in
the right order. We know that ma is one of the things in my maybe
monad. Which means it's either a (Just <something>) or (Nothing). In
the first case, it's a real and actual value. In the second, there was
an error/failure/exception/badness up the road. If there was an error,
we can't compute on it, and we wanna propagate that forward. So if we
had an error, we return an error.

If instead we had a (Just <something>), a non-error value, well we
wanted to do that application. f takes a pure value. We see that,
here. Look, it's taking the cadr of ma. bind, as we theorized, knows
how to take the ma, unwrap the burrito and get ahold of the a, and
call f on it. Whatever comes out of bind needs to still be in the
monad. Pretend this bind is the last thing we do before we end the
computation. Well, I want to make sure I can tell the difference
between returning (Just (Nothing)) and (Nothing), like that yahoo
tried to pull earlier.

f, the function we pass in, the one we're gonna build, needs to be of
alpha -> Mbeta. That way, the thing we hand back is still safely
nestled in the monad. That's the reason behind the "monads are
space-suits" metaphor.  You can't open a space-suit
willy-nilly. You've got to do it nestled safely inside a
space-capsule. If you do it outside, or go outside not wearing one,
you'll die in the cold, cold, blackness of space. Alone. That's what
happens to you if you try to get at the pure inside the monad when you
aren't supposed to.

A word about those alphas and betas there. They don't /have/ to be
distinct types. They can be. But they don't have to be. I'm gonna put
some !s around the parts that you really wanna pay attention to about
the type of bind.

```
bind : (!Malpha! x (!alpha! -> Mbeta)) -> Mbeta
```

The point is that the thing f takes as an argument is exacty the same
type as the first argument to bind, except the first argument to bind
has it all wrapped up in the monad (burrito). 

So that's the gist of what maybe is. Let's real quick write findf-maybe
and, 'cause findf-maybe doesn't show off everything we're gonna wanna
do, we'll write a somewhat contrived example that'll show off
bind-maybe, too.

```
(define findf-maybe
  (lambda (p ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (fail))
      ...)))
```

So far, so good, this makes sense. We've been promising that we'll
return (Nothing) when we can't findf the thing. Whelp, that'll do it.

```
(define findf-maybe
  (lambda (p ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (fail))
      (else (let ((a (car ls)))
              (cond
                ((p a) ...)
                (else ...)))))))
```

So here, we're just setting up and being a bit fancy. I happen to know
for a fact that we're going to need a couple of times, potentially,
so I'm let-binding it above. There's the remaining two cases:
either (p a), or not. We'll handle'em one at a time.

```
(define findf-maybe
  (lambda (p ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (fail))
      (else (let ((a (car ls)))
              (cond
                ((p a) (return-maybe a))
                (else ...)))))))
```

We wrap the thing up in the monad. findf-maybe is written to have
return-type Mbeta. Which makes sense, according to our spec. We wanted
it to return the stuff wrapped up, again, so we could tell the
difference. That's why we put it through return. Final case, the
recursive call. Well, findf-maybe spits back something of Mbeta, which
is what we're after, so nothing special to do here, just the plain-ol'
regular recursion.

```
(define findf-maybe
  (lambda (p ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (fail))
      (else (let ((a (car ls)))
              (cond
                ((p a) (return-maybe a))
                (else (findf-maybe p (cdr ls)))))))))
```

Voilà. Go forth and findf to your heart's content. I promised another
example, this time with bind-maybe. We're gonna try to write an
operator that'll take a list of numbers and return the product of
their reciprocals. Why? You caught me, no good reason. But let's do it
anyway, for sport. Or something.

Now, the thing about reciprocals is that zero doesn't have
one. Division by zero is undefined. So when we try to do this, we're
gonna have to be on the lookout for a zero, and if we hit one, we come
back out with (Nothing).

```
(define prod-recip-maybe
  (lambda (ls)
    ...))
```

We're just gonna blast right through to the new and interesting bit. 

```
(define prod-recip-maybe
  (lambda (ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (return-maybe 1))
      (else
       (let ((a (car ls)))
         (cond
           ((zero? a) (fail))
           (else ...)))))))
```

So we've got a non-zero number in the car. Let's do the recursion, get
that value, and then use it to return the value we're really
after. I'm doing the recursion, which means I'm coming back with a
value in the monad. And then I wanna do something with the value of
that recursive call, to get the value of the whole expression. This is
a job for bind-maybe. If this was being done non-monadically, and we
were using curried-app, again, it'd look like

```
((curried-app (lambda (rec) (* a rec)))
 (prod-recip-maybe (cdr ls)))
```

But we're not, we're 1. in the monad, and 2. really /done/ with that
curried-app thing. Since we're in the monad, bind-maybe's gonna do the
job of pulling the pure out of the monadic value. And we're gonna make
sure that that function returns a monadic value, 'cause the next fella
up the line is expecting a value in the monad. 

```
(define prod-recip-maybe
  (lambda (ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (return-maybe 1))
      (else
       (let ((a (car ls)))
         (cond
           ((zero? a) (fail))
           (else
            (bind-maybe
             (prod-recip-maybe (cdr ls))
             (lambda (rec)
               (return-maybe (* (/ 1 a) rec)))))))))))
```

Well done. Buut, that is looking a little long, and is slightly
obscuring. That do syntax we introduced would certainly clean some of
this up.

```
(define-syntax do
  (syntax-rules (<-)
    ((_ bind e) e)
    ((_ bind (v <- e) e* e** ...)
     (bind e (lambda (v) (do bind e* e** ...))))
    ((_ bind e e* e** ...)
     (bind e (lambda (_) (do bind e* e** ...))))))
```

It's your standard, run-of-the-mill syntax-rules macro. We take which
bind function it is, and a whole bunch of expressions, and expand out
into nested calls to that bind in the right fashion. For our case,
this yields

```
(define prod-recip-maybe
  (lambda (ls)
    (cond
      ((null? ls) (return-maybe 1))
      (else
       (let ((a (car ls)))
         (cond
           ((zero? a) (fail))
           (else
            (do bind-maybe
              (rec <- (prod-recip-maybe (cdr ls)))
              (return-maybe (* (/ 1 a) rec))))))))))
```

And /there/ we go.

Now, Go Eat A Burrito! Maybe While Wearing A Space-Suit!
