---
title: Job hunting advice.
---

I recently had cause to think about some advice for recent graduates
hunting for jobs. This is probably applicable too if you're laid off
and need to find a new job. Caveats that this worked for me a dozen
years ago, and it's tailored to students looking for programmer jobs.

   1. Get a second email address that doesn’t obviously look like a
      backup email address. You don’t want job mail spam in your inbox
      for the rest of eternity.
   2. Make job hunting your full-time job until you have one. It’s a
      9-5 process. There’s a lead time before you’re going to start
      seeing results, and you don’t know how long that is, but don’t
      sit and wait for that one org of your dreams to get back to you.
   3. Start with the “usual suspects” job recruiting sites—Monster,
      indeed, etc. Fill out profiles and filters and set yourself up
      with a feed for job leads.
   4. Any place that has an RSS feed, find yourself an RSS reader and
      subscribe to them. This can be your work list, and mean there’s
      a whole bunch of sites you don’t have to check.
   5. Work backwards in time, from most recent to more distant
      postings.
   6. Niche technology where you have experience can be a good place
      to start, because they probably have trouble recruiting for
      that.
   7. When you find a job you want to apply for, do it from the
      company’s intranet if you can.
   8. Google itself also has job search listings now, and you can use
      that too.
   9. Often times when you’re looking up a job listing, you’ll find
      another _site_ on which that job is posted that you hadn’t
      looked before. This is how you build breadth to your job search.
      Let the job listings lead you to more sites, and the job hunt
      sites lead you to more jobs listings.
   10. Recruiters/headhunters can be useful, get in touch w/them too.
   11. If you’ve graduated recently enough, the school might still
       offer advice on your resume. Some schools have an alumni
       network that to tap. The other thing I’ve seen is to update
       your LinkedIn profile, see where your colleagues and contacts
       are working, and then go to those companies’ websites for
       listings.
   12. In fact, you can also start picking out companies that you’ve
       heard of that you wouldn’t mind working for, and apply directly
       with them. That’s another way to increase your pool of job
       sites.
   13. Use several common search strings for positions on the search
       sites. You know that “software engineer” “programmer” “computer
       scientist” “software developer” “platform engineer” can bleed
       across one another, but the sites don’t and HR might not
       either. If a site only lets you have one active search, then
       get another email address and another login to that site, and
       have your second search set up that way.
   14. Make sure your resume is AI/search friendly. Use the key words
       and phrases that will get you past the automatic filters and
       into the hands of a human being.
   15. Borrow the address of a friend’s couch. If you’re willing to
       relocate, and you have someone in the area, then you can put
       that person’s address on the resume making you look like a
       local hire. “I’ve been staying with a friend out there while I
       .. I just recently moved back to my place…” yadda. IME, by the
       time you’re far enough along that you seem like a candidate
       worth interviewing in person, then that won’t matter. If it
       does.
   16. As I understand it, in person commuting-to-work jobs are going
       to be less competitive than the remote jobs, because a) people
       place a premium on the work from home and b) you are already
       excluding all the people who aren’t in or willing to be in a
       commute distance of that job.
   17. You can and probably should have multiple versions of your
       resume tailored to different kinds of positions. Depending on
       what technology they want you to work with and what the role
       requires, you’ll emphasize different things in your background.
       If you can, make it look like you’re already an expert at doing
       the job they want to hire you for.
   18. Double, triple check your emails and spelling and that you’re
       addressing the right company with the right job. If you can,
       build yourself a little program that will automate portions of
       your cover letter. If you’re building it with PDF, then using
       TeX macros `\longname` `\shortname` `\mediumname`
       `\specialreason` to fill in a cover letter could both save you
       time and frustration
   19. Likewise, before you send something, have a tool read it to
       you, out loud. You can listen for mistakes that sound obvious
       but are difficult to pick out. You can do this on 2x speed if
       you’re quick enough. This isn’t a place to be lazy.
   20. If you have time, especially if you think you’ll be off for a
       while, pull out that side project you’d been working on, and
       spend some nights and weekends on that. It’s something new you
       can show off, looks good on your GitHub commit history, and
       gives you something to talk about at an interview.
   21. This may be less applicable, but _if_ you’re going to be off
       work for a _while_ having a volunteer position doing something
       related could be helpful just to keep a blank off your resume.
       OSS and side projects are nice too, but that doesn’t fit in a
       spot on a resume. Maybe start thinking about this in your
       second month off, so that you can _have_ something in hand. A
       position that you’ve had for 6 months working one day a week
       looks better than 5 months off and then a whole month straight
       of volunteering.

I know [it’s tough out there](https://youtu.be/KT4vhl8slbE). Most of
that is probably common sense to readers, but I hope there’s something
in there that’s worthwhile.
